FISH-290 Updates MC User Manual to Payara InSight v1 (#60)
payara/Payara-Enterprise-Documentation: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/documentation/user-guides/monitoring/monitoring-console.adoc

The metrics include server metrics from different sources within the server as well as metrics defined in user applications using _MicroProfile Metrics_ and metrics derived from _MicroProfile Health_ checks.

[[monitoring-console-installation]]
== Enabling the GUI
By default the GUI of Payara InSight is automatically enabled for the `production` domain.
Links can be found on the _Common Tasks_ home page of the Admin GUI in section _Monitoring_ or on the _Monitoring Data_ page.

For `domain1` the GUI is not enabled by default and the `set-monitoring-console-configuration` is used to enable it on demand.

To enable the GUI manually run the following asadmin command:

        asadmin> set-monitoring-console-configuration --enabled=true

Payara InSight is now available at http://localhost:8080/monitoring-console/ .
Like the admin GUI it only runs on the DAS.

To stop the GUI run:

        asadmin> set-monitoring-console-configuration --enabled=false

Stopping the GUI does not disable the data collection.
This is a background process that is controlled separately as described in the next section.

> NOTE: Payara InSight is only bundeled with Payara Server Enterprise distribution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: Payara InSight is only bundled with Payara Server Enterprise distribution.
```

NOTE: Some metrics are only available when the monitoring configuration of certain server parts is set to `HIGH`. Widgets that do depend on such a configuration changes let you know how to enable the metrics.

[[monitoring-console-pages]]
=== Pages
Payara InSight is organized in fully customisable pages. A page is a collection of xref:#monitoring-console-widgets[widgets] arranged in columns. Usually pages are focussed on visualising metrics of a specific area of the server, like HTTP or request tracing. The preconfigured pages are a starting point that can be changed and extended by the user. New custom pages can be created and populated with arbitrary metrics.

[[monitoring-console-page-switch]]
==== Switching Pages
To switch page use the left menu.

image::monitoring-console/mc_menu_left.png[Page Navigation]

image::monitoring-console/mc_menu_left-min.png[Page Navigation (minimised)]

Since version _5.20.0_, each page switch also updates the URL making the URL bookmarkable.
URLs can be copied and shared with others to direct them to particular pages.

> Updating URLs after switching pages also means that navigation based on browser's page history is possible and the back button can be used to already visited pages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Updating URLs after switching pages also means that navigation based on the browser's page history is possible and the back button can be used to already visited pages.
```

[[monitoring-console-page-layout]]
==== Changing Page Layout
Each page uses a column layout of one or more columns. The number of columns for a page can be changed using one of the _Layout Columns_ quick access buttons.

Changing the column layout of a page does not change the preferred position of the widgets. If a widget is set to column 3 but a 2-column layout is used all widgets of the 3rd or 4th column get pushed to the 2nd column instead. This allows switching layouts based on the viewing device without redoing the configuration entirely.

[[monitoring-console-page-interval]]
==== Changing Page Update Interval

> By default the graphs on a page update every 2 seconds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the graphs on a page update every 2 seconds.
```

image::monitoring-console/mc_settings_page_general-query-h.png[Query Page Settings]

Fill in _Query Series_ and _Query Interval_ and click the _Update Now_ button.

NOTE: Query pages are repopulated in intervals. Any changes to individual widget settings will be overridden with the next population. However, queries can be used to initially populate a page and then switch the page back to _Type: Manual_ so that changes to the widgets are kept. Naturally this comes at the downside that metrics no longer are added to the page automatically.

Learn more about xref:#monitoring-console-widget-advanced[series patterns] as used by query pages.

[[monitoring-console-page-delete]]
==== Deleting a Page
To delete a page open the left sidebar and click the on the trash icon next to the page name in the list of pages you want to delete.

image::monitoring-console/mc_menu_delete.png[Delete a Page]

Confirm the deletion.

image::monitoring-console/mc_dialog_delete-page.png[Delete a Page Confirmation Dialogue]

NOTE: Pages that are based on a preset cannot be deleted. They can only be reset to their preset configuration.

[[monitoring-console-page-reset]]
==== Reset a Page

> When the configuration of a preconfigured page or any of the widgets on it was changed by the user the page can be reset by clicking _Reset_ icon next to the page name in the expanded left side menu.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the configuration of a preconfigured page or any of the widgets on it was changed by the user the page can be reset by clicking the _Reset_ icon next to the page name in the expanded left side menu.
```

image::monitoring-console/mc_menu_reset.png[Reset a Page]

Confirm the reset.

image::monitoring-console/mc_dialog_reset-page.png[Reset a Page]

WARNING: The reset will affect all widgets and the general page settings of the currently shown page. All changes made previously by a user will be overridden.

> NOTE: To reset all pages and remove all user created pages clear the browser's local storage of Payara InSight.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: To reset all pages and remove all user-created pages, clear the browser's local storage of Payara InSight.
```

image::monitoring-console/mc_sample_local-storage-chrome.png[Clear Local Storage in Chrome Browser]

[[monitoring-console-page-rotation]]
==== Page Rotation

> Payara InSight is built with the intention of being used to display metrics on status monitors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Payara InSight is meant to be used to display metrics on status monitors.
```

To allow viewing a variety of pages and their metrics on a single screen the pages can be automatically rotated showing each page for a configured interval duration.

To start or stop page rotation either use the quick access button at the button of the left side menu or use the toggle switch in the _General_ application settings.
This starts or stops the rotation immediately and each page is shown for the configured duration starting with the currently shown page.

> The duration can be adjusted changing the text field of the _Page Rotation_ to another time value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The duration can be adjusted by changing the text field of the _Page Rotation_ to another time value.
```

Use units to express the duration, as for example: `1min`, `30sec`.
Changes take effect immediately.

Individual pages can be excluded from rotation by toggling the _Include In Rotation_ toggle to _No_ in the page settings.

image::monitoring-console/mc_settings_page_general-h.png[Page Settings]

[[monitoring-console-page-sync]]
==== Page Management
Payara InSight uses the browser's local storage to store the page and widget configuration.

> This means by default changes to page configurations do not affect other users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that, by default, changes to page configurations do not affect other users.
```

To make pages available to others and to start from a common base configuration pages are explicitly shared and updated from a persistent server configuration.

> The chosen role controls the behaviour and available options for the page management.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The chosen role controls the behaviour and available options for page management.
```

It is the _Administrator_'s role that is meant to manage the persistent server page configuration.
The _Administrator_ explicitly pushes local pages to the server to share and update their base configuration.
__User__s and __Guest__s pull the server configuration to update their local configuration with the base.
The control remains with each user.

The _Page Synchronisation_ dialogue shown when entering the GUI allows the user to pick the pages that should be updated (pulled).

image::monitoring-console/mc_dialog_sync-pages.png[Page Synchronisation]

> By default all pages available remotely that have not been changed locally are preselected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, all pages available remotely that have not been changed locally are preselected.
```

NOTE: _Guest_ automatically pull the servers base configuration, no dialogue is used

The newest version is marked with an asterisk for easier orientation.

> This dialogue can also be opened from the _Pages_ application settings by clicking the _Update Local..._ button shown _Page Sync_ property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This dialogue can also be opened from the _Pages_ application settings by clicking the _Update Local..._ button for the _Page Sync_ property.
```

image::monitoring-console/mc_settings_app_pages-h.png[Page Synchronisation Application Settings]

__Administrator__s also find a button to _Update Server..._ pages with any changes applied to local changes.
This is only needed for pages that are not using _auto_matic updates in their page settings.

> This simply should give administrators different approaches of managing the shared pages configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This simply should give administrators different approaches to managing the configuration of shared pages.
```

__Administrator__s can also enable or disable the __auto__matic page synchronisation.
When enabled any local change done by an _Administrator_ is automatically pushed to the remote configuration.

Both _Push_ and _Pull_ need to be confirmed.

image::monitoring-console/mc_dialog_pull-page.png[Confirm Page Pull]
image::monitoring-console/mc_dialog_push-page.png[Confirm Page Push]

[[monitoring-console-page-export]]
Besides the managed page synchronisation which is using the persistent server configuration the local configuration can also be managed manually.
To manually export pages click the _Export..._ button and select the set of pages to export in the dialogue and confirm your selection by pressing _Export_

image::monitoring-console/mc_dialog_export-pages.png[Page Export Dialogue]

[[monitoring-console-page-import]]
To manually import pages click the _Import..._ button and select a file.
The dialogue will show the list of pages contained in the file.
Select the pages that should be imported.

image::monitoring-console/mc_dialog_import-pages.png[Page Import Dialogue]

> WARNING: Importing a pages will override the local page with the same ID (name). Any customisation made to the local page will be lost.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WARNING: Importing a page will override the local page with the same ID (name). Any customisation made to the local page will be lost.
```

[[monitoring-console-user-role]]
==== Changing User Role
A user of Payara InSight acts in one of three roles:

* Guest: A user that uses Payara InSight only on occasion to check existing metrics on existing pages ("read-only" user).
* User: A user that uses Payara InSight to experiment with its features without affecting others.
* Administrator:  A user that administrates the Payara InSight configuration that is the basis for other users.

> When no role is set from previous sessions the user is asked to choose a role when opening Payara InSight application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When no role is set from previous sessions the user is asked to choose a role when opening the Payara InSight application.
```

image::monitoring-console/mc_dialog_role-selection.png[Role Selection]

The selection can be changed at any time in the _General_ application settings for _Role_.

image::monitoring-console/mc_settings_app_general-h.png[Role Setting]

> NOTE: At this point roles are not connected to accounts or other forms of permission management. User can switch between the roles to suit their current intentions when using Payara InSight. We plan to connect roles to accounts and require a login in the near feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: At this point, roles are not connected to accounts or other forms of permission management. Users can switch between the roles to suit their current intentions when using Payara InSight. We plan to connect roles to accounts and require a login in the near feature.
```

[[monitoring-console-widgets]]
=== Widgets

> Widgets are the components that can be placed on a page to show a particular metric or indeed sets of metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Widgets are the components that can be placed on a page to show a particular metric or a set of metrics.
```

While there are different types of widgets usually a widget shows a line graph of one or more metrics for the entire cluster.

[[monitoring-console-widget-add]]
==== Adding a Widget
Widgets can be added to any page. Click the plus button in the minimized right side menu or the _Add New Chart_ button when it is expanded.

image::monitoring-console/mc_menu_right.png[Settings Menu Expanded]
image::monitoring-console/mc_menu_right-min.png[Settings Menu Collapsed]

This opens the _Add New Widget_ dialogue.

image::monitoring-console/mc_dialog_add-new-widget.png[Add New Widget Dialogue]

> Use any one or combination of the filter dropdowns to select a subset of metrics and/or enter a query text in any of the free text search input fields to further narrow down the results. All matching metrics will be shown in the left hand list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use any one or combination of the filter dropdowns to select a subset of metrics and/or enter a query text in any of the free text search input fields to further narrow down the results. All matching metrics will be shown in the list on the left.
```

> Select one or more items. Selected metrics are shown in the right hand list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Select one or more items. Selected metrics are shown in the list on the right.
```

> Between selection the search can be changed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The search can be changed between selection.
```

> Finally confirm the selection by clicking the _Add_ button of the dialogue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, confirm the selection by clicking the _Add_ button of the dialogue.
```

Newly added widgets are automatically placed in a column so that widgets are evenly distributed on the page.

> Use the xref:#monitoring-console-widget-config[side panel widget settings] to change column, width, height or item position of the widget or use the quick menu for the widget by clicking the pencil symbol in the top right corner of the widget.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the xref:#monitoring-console-widget-config[side panel widget settings] to change the column, width, height or item position of the widget or use the quick menu for the widget by clicking the pencil symbol in the top right corner of the widget.
```

[[monitoring-console-widget-config]]
==== Configuring a Widget
To configure a widget select it by clicking on its title or the pencil icon in the top right corner of the widget.

> This opens the right settings side panel and shows the detail configuration of the widget.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This opens the right settings side panel and shows the detailed configuration of the widget.
```

The side panel can be closed by either deselecting the widget, by clicking on its title again, or by clicking the collapse icon of the right sidebar.

NOTE: If the settings have been opened explicitly through the _Settings_ menu an empty selection will not close the settings side panel.

> The _General_ widget settings are concerned with the widgets position within the page and its general appearance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The _General_ widget settings are concerned with the widget's position within the page and its general appearance.
```

This includes visual helpers that can be added to a graph of a widget in order to make it easier to for the user to quickly understand the data displayed.
In particular these are reference lines and threshold indications.

image::monitoring-console/mc_settings_widget_extras-h.png[Widget Extras Settings]

.Widget Extras Settings
[cols="1,1,4",options="header"]
|====================
| Property | Default | Description
| Annotations | (checked) |  Whether or not to show annotations for in an alert table.
| Annotations (Fields) | _(blank)_ | A comma or space separated list of fields to show for an annotation list or table. The given field order is reflected in the view.
| Aggregates | (none checked) | Check to add the all time minimum, maximum or average line to the graph
| Waterline | (undefined) | Adds a simple reference line that could mark a upper or lower limit. Enter in unit of y-axis, e.g. 20ms, 5s, 2GB, 4%, 123
| Threshold Reference | `Off` | Controls what value the _Alarming Threshold_ and _Critical Threshold_ are compared to. Usually this is the most recent value but in some cases the all time minimum, maximum or average are useful too.

> | Alarming Threshold | (undefined) | The limit for the _"Alarming"_ state. If _Critical Threshold_ is undefined or if it's value is larger than this value the alarming threshold is exceeded if the reference value is larger than the threshold. Otherwise, if the _Critical Threshold_ is lower than the _Alarming Threshold_, the threshold becomes 'inverse', and is exceeded when the reference value falls below the alarming value. When exceeded the status becomes _"Alarming"_. Enter in unit of y-axis, e.g. 20ms, 5s, 2GB, 4%, 123

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Alarming Threshold | (undefined) | The limit for the _"Alarming"_ state. If _Critical Threshold_ is undefined or if its value is larger than this value the alarming threshold is exceeded if the reference value is larger than the threshold. Otherwise, if the _Critical Threshold_ is lower than the _Alarming Threshold_, the threshold becomes 'inverse', and is exceeded when the reference value falls below the alarming value. When exceeded the status becomes _"Alarming"_. Enter in unit of y-axis, e.g. 20ms, 5s, 2GB, 4%, 123
```

* _Green_: values in this range indicate a healthy state
* _White_: values in this range are in no particular state (neither good or bad, maybe undecidable)

> State changes to amber or red are reported as alerts. This show in the widget they affect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
State changes to amber or red are reported as alerts. This is shown in the widget they affect.
```

> The settings allow to filter these related alerts to prevent them from showing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The settings allow filtering these related alerts to prevent them from showing.
```

This makes sense on pages that have dedicated widgets to show alerts or just if users prefer to see the graph instead.

image::monitoring-console/mc_settings_widget_alerts-h.png[Widget Alerts Settings]

[cols="1,1,4",options="header"]
|====================
| Property | Default | Description
| Filter | (none checked) | Do not show (when checked) _Amber_ and/or _Red_ alerts, _Ongoing_ and/or _Stopped_ alerts, _Acknowledged_ and/or _Unacknowledged_ alerts.
|====================

> NOTE: If for any of these 3 groups of pairs both are checked no alerts would be shown. Widgets of type _Time Curve_ automatically exclude stopped and acknowledged alerts to avoid cluttering the graph with alerts that aren't relevant any more. Use a widget of type _Alerts Table_ to show all alerts according to the filter at all times.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: If for any of these 3 groups of pairs both are checked no alerts would be shown. Widgets of type _Time Curve_ automatically exclude stopped and acknowledged alerts to avoid cluttering the graph with alerts that aren't relevant anymore. Use a widget of type _Alerts Table_ to show all alerts according to the filter at all times.
```

A _Red_ or _Amber_ state causes an alert that is shown on top of the graph.

image::monitoring-console/mc_sample_widget-alert.png[Example for an alert in line graph]

When an alert occurred for a metric shown in a graph the background of the line causing the alert is coloured in _Red_ or _Amber_ default colour until the alert is stopped.

Alerts are considered ongoing as long as the state is _Red_ or _Amber_.
If it is evaluated to _Green_ or _White_ ("unspecified") the alert stops.
Stopped or acknowledged alerts are no longer shown on top of line graphs.
Other ways to hide an alert from a line graph is to acknowledge the alert by checking its checkbox
or to configure the widget's _Alerts_ _Filter_ xref:#monitoring-console-widget-alerts[setting] so that alerts generally aren't shown for that widget.

To see even stopped or acknowledged alerts add a widget of type _Alert Table_.

image::monitoring-console/mc_sample_widget-alert-table.png[Example of alert table showing a subset of alerts]

image::monitoring-console/mc_sample_page-alerts.png[Example of a "global" alert table shown all alerts (as used by the alert page)]

> By default an alert table shows all alerts including stopped and acknowledged alerts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, an alert table shows all alerts including stopped and acknowledged alerts.
```

[[monitoring-console-widget-remove]]
==== Removing a Widget
Any widget can be removed from any page.
Click the pencil symbol in the top right of the widget or its title to open the widget's settings.
On the _General_ widget settings tab you find the _Remove_ button.

image::monitoring-console/mc_settings_widget_general-h.png[Remove Widget Buttonin General Widget Settings]

Confirm you want to remove the widget

image::monitoring-console/mc_dialog_delete-widget.png[Remove Widget Confirmation Dialogue]

Remember that a page originating from a preset can be xref:#monitoring-console-page-reset[reset] to recover a widget that was removed accidentally.

[[monitoring-console-page-settings]]
=== Page Settings
Most of the page settings have already be described in context of the different page related user actions.
The following tables are included for reference.

The common page settings are those used by pages of _Type_ _Manual_ and _Query_.

image::monitoring-console/mc_settings_page_general-h.png[Common Page Settings]

.Common Page Settings
[cols="1,1,4",options="header"]
|====================
| Property | Default | Description

> | Name | - | The name as given by the user when the page was created or as defined in the page preset, only user created pages can be renamed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Name | - | The name as given by the user when the page was created or as defined in the page preset, only user-created pages can be renamed
```

After giving your watch a unique name select the metric that should be watched.
Only single metrics are supported as of yet.

Select the appropriate unit for the selected metric.
Depending on the chosen unit thresholds can be given in values of this unit, e.g. when selecting _Milliseconds_ the threshold can be given as `1s` for 1 second.

NOTE: Currently there is limited knowledge what the raw number of the metrics means as not all sources do include this information.

When name, watched metric and unit are set, check any of the states a condition should be formulated for and enter the comparison operator, the threshold and the scope.

The below table describes possible choices for each step of a watch condition.

.Watch Condition Segments
[cols="1,1,3",options="header"]
|====================
| Segment | Type | Description
| `is` _operator_ | Start | Select the comparison operator to use when comparing the actual value(s) to the threshold. The comparison is of form _actual operator threshold_.
| `is` _threshold_ | Start | The numeric threshold. The upper/lower limit. With the right unit selected the number can be given with a unit such as `5min` for time units, or `4KB` for bytes.

> | `is` _scope_ | Start | Select a scopes for the actual values that are compared to the threshold. The semantics of the different scoped are described in a separate table below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `is` _scope_ | Start | Select a scope for the actual values that are compared to the threshold. The semantics of different scopes are described in a separate table below.
```

image::monitoring-console/mc_dialog_edit-watch.png[Edit a User Watch Dialogue]

Confirm changes by clicking _Update_.

When changing the name of the watch a new watch is created with the new name and the old watch continues to exist.
It can be deleted afterwards using the _Delete_ button in the _User Watches_ list.

WARNING: When changing the name of a watch to a name of an already existing watch this overrides that watch. In other words watches are always identified by their name.

NOTE: System watches cannot be edited. To achieve the effect of a changed system watch disable and copy it. The copy is a user watch that can be can be adjusted freely. The suggested name _Copy of {original name}_ can be changed as long as it is unique.

==== Disabling or Enabling a Watch
Open the xref:#monitoring-console-watches[watch manager] as _Administrator_ and click the _Disable_ or _Enable_ button of the watch that should be disabled or enabled.
The change has immediate effect and can easily be "undone" by toggling the state again.

> If there where any ongoing alerts due to a watch that gets disabled these alerts stops.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If there were any ongoing alerts due to a watch that gets disabled, these alerts stops.
```

Enabling such a watch again then requires matching the watches start condition again.

[[monitoring-console-presets]]
=== Preconfigured Pages
Payara InSight is shipped with a dozen of preconfigured pages.

> These are in no way privileged over user created pages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These are in no way privileged over the user-created pages.
```

* _CPU Usage_: Percentage CPU usage by the instance (not the machine but the process).
* _Thread Pool Current Thread Usage_: Percentage of HTTP thread pool threads currently in use by the instance.

[[monitoring-console-preset-rag]]
==== Traffic Light Status Page

> The _Traffic Light Status_ page (a.k.a. RAG Status for Red-Amber-Green Status) gives an indication of the health status of the server and deployed application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The _Traffic Light Status_ page (a.k.a. RAG Status for Red-Amber-Green Status) indicates the health status of the server and deployed application
```

The legend shows the average duration and the method traced (innermost trace span operation)

image::monitoring-console/mc_page_request-tracing.png[Request Tracing Page]

When checking the minimum and/or maximum checkbox in the widgets _Extras_ settings the bar starts and/or ends at these "all time" values instead of the minimum and/or maximum within the last minute.

The _Trace Duration Above Threshold_ widget shows a graph where each point marks the duration of a "slow" request at the moment the requests occurred. Possible alerts are shown on top of the graph.

By clicking on one of the bars in the overview's _Trace Duration Range_ widget the details of all kept traces for this method can be viewed.

image::monitoring-console/mc_dialog_request-tracing.png[Request Tracing Details Dialogue]

This data corresponds to the traces stored in the trace-store.
For each trace, each of the spans corresponds to a bar in this graph.

The details can be sorted by wall-time or by total duration.

> By default the traces are sorted longest (slowest) to shortest (fastest) total duration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the traces are sorted longest (slowest) to shortest (fastest) total duration.
```

On the time axis the spans are shown relative to the start of the trace.

The legend gives average durations for each of the spans occurring for the traced method.

NOTE: The detail view shows a snapshot of the data found in the trace store. Changing the sorting will reload data and reflect an updated snapshot.

When clicking on the bars in the details view the right side panel shows the trace span details of the clicked trace span.

> WARNING: Be aware that the graphs in the example images above show unrealistically low numbers due to the way that request tracing was configured. In a more realistic configurations the durations are more likely to be in range of few hundred milliseconds to some seconds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WARNING: Be aware that the graphs in the example images above show unrealistically low numbers due to the way that request tracing was configured. In a more realistic configuration, the durations are more likely to be in range of a few hundred milliseconds to some seconds.
```
